DOCSP-42104 CSOT (#136)
mongodb/docs-ruby: source/connect/csot.txt

.. _ruby-csot:

===========================
Limit Server Execution Time
===========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference
 
.. meta::

>    :keywords: error, blocking, thread, task

Reviewer: S: always include code example in this list if there are code examples on the page!

Overview
--------

> When you use the {+driver-short+} to perform a server operation, you can also

Reviewer: S: add an introductory "In this guide, you can learn... " sentence

> When you use the {+driver-short+} to perform a server operation, you can also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use the {+driver-short+} to perform a server operation, you can
```

limit the duration allowed for the server to finish the operation. To do so,
specify a **client-side operation timeout (CSOT)**. The timeout applies to all
steps needed to complete the operation, including server selection, connection

> checkout, and server-side execution. When the timeout expires, the
> {+driver-short+} raises a timeout exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
checkout, and server-side execution. If the timeout expires before the operation completes, the
{+driver-short+} raises a timeout exception.
```

timeout_ms Option
-----------------

To specify a timeout when connecting to a MongoDB deployment, set the
``timeout_ms`` connection option to the timeout length in milliseconds. You can
do this in two ways: by passing an argument to the ``Mongo::Client`` constructor

> or through a parameter in your connection string.

Reviewer: S: convert this into a list

> The following code examples use the ``timeout_ms`` client option or the ``timeoutMS``
> connection string option to specify a timeout of 30 seconds:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select from the following tabs to view examples for how to use the ``timeout_ms`` client
option and the ``timeoutMS`` connection string option to specify a timeout of 30 seconds:
```

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: MongoClient
      :tabid: mongoclient

      .. code-block:: ruby
         :emphasize-lines: 2

         uri = "<connection string>"
         options = { timeout_ms: 30000 }

         client = Mongo::Client.new(uri, options)
   
   .. tab:: Connection String
      :tabid: connection-string

      .. code-block:: ruby
         :emphasize-lines: 1

         uri = "mongodb://<hostname>:<port>?timeoutMS=30000"
         client = Mongo::Client.new(uri)

If you specify the ``timeout_ms`` option, the driver automatically applies the

> specified timeout per each server operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specified timeout for each server operation.
```

.. note:: 

   The ``timeout_ms`` connection option unifies most timeout related options.

>    As of the {+driver-short+} v2.21, the following timeout options are deprecated: 

Reviewer: S: dont need to mention the version as these are versioned docs already
```suggestion
   The following timeout options are deprecated:
```

   - ``socket_timeout``
   - ``wait_queue_timeout``
   - ``wtimeout``
   - ``max_time_ms``
   - ``max_commit_time_ms``

   The ``timeout_ms`` connection option takes precedence over these 
   deprecated timeout options. 

Timeout Inheritance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you specify a ``timeout_ms`` option, the driver applies the timeout
according to the same inheritance behaviors as the other {+driver-short+} options.
The following table describes how the timeout value is inherited at each level:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Level
     - Inheritance Description

   * - Operation

>      - Takes the highest precedence and will override ``timeout_ms``
>        options set at any other level.

Reviewer: S: convert sentences to present tense
```suggestion
     - Takes the highest precedence and overrides ``timeout_ms``
       options set at any other level.
```

   * - Transaction
     - Takes precedence over ``timeout_ms`` set at the session,
       collection, database, or client level.

   * - Session
     - Applies to all transactions and operations within
       that session, unless the option is overridden by options set at those levels.

   * - Database
     - Applies to all sessions and operations within that
       database, unless the option is overridden by options set at those levels.

   * - Collection
     - Applies to all sessions and operations on that
       collection, unless the option is overridden by options set at those levels.

   * - Client
     - Applies to all databases, collections, sessions, transactions, and
       operations within that client that do not otherwise specify
       ``timeout_ms``.

> For more information on overrides and specific options, see the :ref:`Overrides
> <ruby-csot-overrides>` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about overriding the timeout option and setting other options, see the 
following :ref:`ruby-csot-overrides` section.
```

.. _ruby-csot-overrides:

Overrides
---------

You can specify a ``timeout_ms`` option at the operation level to override the
client-level configuration for a specific operation. This allows you to
customize timeouts based on the needs of individual queries.

The following example demonstrates how an operation-level ``timeout_ms``
configuration can override a client-level ``timeout_ms`` configuration:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/connect/csot.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: start-csot-overrides
   :end-before: end-csot-overrides

Transactions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 

Reviewer: S: add an introductory sentence here like "You can also set timeout options for transactions."

When you create a new ``Mongo::Session`` instance to implement a transaction, use

> the ``default_timeout_ms`` option. You can set ``default_timeout_ms`` to specify the
> ``timeout_ms`` values to use for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``default_timeout_ms`` connection option. You can set ``default_timeout_ms`` to specify the
``timeout_ms`` values to use for the following methods:
```

- `commit_transaction <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Session.html#commit_transaction-instance_method>`__
- `abort_transaction <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Session.html#abort_transaction-instance_method>`__
- `with_transaction <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Session.html#with_transaction-instance_method>`__
- `end_session <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Session.html#end_session-instance_method>`__

If you do not specify ``default_timeout_ms``, the driver uses the ``timeout_ms``
value set on the parent ``Mongo::Client``.

You cannot override the ``timeout_ms`` value of the ``Mongo::Client`` for a 
call to ``start_session``. 

You can only set a timeout value for the 
`start_transaction <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Session.html#start_transaction-instance_method>`__

> method by using the ``timeout_ms`` option.

Author: For tech reviewer, can you confirm that this statement is true? Thank you!

Reviewer 2: Are you asking to confirm that `default_timeout_ms` is not applied to `start_transaction`? If so, yes, that is true. Note that `start_transaction` doesn't actually perform any operations on the server, but only applies any options  given to it, to subsequent transaction-related commands.

 
You cannot override ``default_timeout_ms`` by setting the ``timeout_ms`` option on an

> operation in a transaction session provided by the ``with_transaction`` callback.
> Doing so throws an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operation in a transaction session provided by the ``with_transaction`` callback,
or the driver throws an error.
```

Cursor Lifetime Mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cursor lifetime mode uses ``timeout_ms`` to limit the entire lifetime of a
cursor. In this mode, the initialization of the cursor and all subsequent calls
to the cursor methods must complete within the limit specified by the
``timeout_ms`` option. All documents must be returned within this limit.
Otherwise, the cursor's lifetime expires and a timeout error occurs.

When you close a cursor by calling the  ``to_a`` or ``close`` method, the
timeout resets to ensure server-side resources are cleaned up.

The following example shows how to set the ``timeout_ms`` option to ensure that
the cursor is initialized and all documents are retrieved within 10 seconds:

.. code-block:: ruby

   docs = collection.find({}, timeout_ms:10000).to_a

Cursor Iteration Mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cursor iteration mode uses the ``timeout_ms`` option to limit each call to
the ``try_next`` method. The timeout refreshes after each call completes. 
This is the default mode for all tailable cursors,
such as the tailable cursors returned by the ``find`` method on capped
collections or change streams.

> The following code example iterates over documents in the ``mflix`` collection
> by using an iterable cursor, and then fetches and logs the ``imdb`` information for 

Reviewer: S: omit unnecessary info
```suggestion
The following code example iterates over documents in a collection
by using an iterable cursor, and then fetches and logs the ``imdb`` information for 
```

   :values: reference
 
.. meta::

>    :keywords: error, blocking, thread, task, code examples

Reviewer: https://wiki.corp.mongodb.com/display/DE/Taxonomy+tagging+instructions#:~:text=Description-,%22code%20example%22,-Add%20to%20every
```suggestion
   :keywords: error, blocking, thread, task, code example
```

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the ``timeout_ms`` option to set a 
timeout for server operations. 

When you use the {+driver-short+} to perform a server operation, you can
limit the duration allowed for the server to finish the operation. To do so,
specify a **client-side operation timeout (CSOT)**. The timeout applies to all
steps needed to complete the operation, including server selection, connection
checkout, and server-side execution. If the timeout expires before the operation 
completes, the {+driver-short+} raises a timeout exception.

``timeout_ms`` Option

> ---------------------

Reviewer: S: remove monospacing from titles per [SG](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/titles-and-headings/#:~:text=Don%27t%20apply%20font%20treatments%20(bold%2C%20italics%2C%20or%20monospace)%20to%20text%20in%20a%20title%20or%20heading.)

To specify a timeout when connecting to a MongoDB deployment, set the
``timeout_ms`` connection option to the timeout length in milliseconds. You can

> specify a timeout value in two ways: 

Reviewer: S: one less thing to fix in case there are more/less ways to do this one day
```suggestion
specify a timeout value in the following ways: 
```

- Pass the ``timeout_ms`` client option to the ``Mongo::Client`` constructor.
- Pass the ``timeoutMS`` connection string option as a parameter to your connection string.

Select from the following tabs to view examples for how to use the ``timeout_ms`` client
option or the ``timeoutMS`` connection string option to specify a timeout of 30 seconds:

.. tabs::

>    .. tab:: Mongo::Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab:: Client Option
```

Author: I'll leave as is to stay consistent with the tab naming. Naming the other tab 'Connection String Option' would be too long

such as the tailable cursors returned by the ``find`` method on capped
collections or change streams.

> The following code example iterates over documents in a movie collection

Reviewer: S: consider changing this example to show the collection definition or else you can just call it a sample collection. also consider changing the `imdb` field to something more common like title or year
